
Donate Now
Academy for Systems Change

    About
    Works of Donella Meadows
    Resources

Systems Thinking Resources
Systems Thinking Resources
The Iceberg Model

https://donellameadows.org/systems-thinking-resources/

The iceberg model is a valuable tool to encourage systemic thinking and help you contextualize an issue as part of a whole system. By asking you to connect an event–a single incident or occurrence–to patterns of behavior, systems structures, and mental models, the iceberg allows you to see the structures underlying the event. Just like an iceberg, 90% of which is invisible beneath the water, these structures are often hidden below the surface. However, if you can identify them and connect them to the events that you are seeing, you may be able to develop lasting solutions that target the whole system rather than short term, reactive solutions.

We have a copy of the iceberg model hanging in our office. Download this file to print out your own!

In a World of Systems

Enjoy “In a World of Systems”, narrated and illustrated by David Macaulay (of “How Things Work”) in collaboration with Linda Booth Sweeney and our team at Donella Meadows Project. Sit back and meet systems in our everyday lives, from plumbing to traffic jams to fisheries, based on the work of Donella Meadows!

Five Design Principles from the Work of Donella Meadows

At a time so deeply painful for many, what design principles might we draw from to shape a positive new normal?

We partnered with our friends at CoCreative for a webinar focusing on the work and teachings of Dana Meadows. The webinar explored some of the practical ideas that made Dana Meadows so beloved by people interested in making a world that works for all.
The Bathtub Theorem

This simple theorem is easily visualized by imagining a bathtub: water enters the tub via the faucet and it exits through the drain, through leaks, or by overflowing the sides. These two flows of water–the inflow and the outflow–together determine the water level and stability of the bathtub. To maintain a constant level, the inflow must equal the outflow.

The bathtub theorem is a useful mental model when thinking about issues like economics and climate change. This simulation from Climate Interactive is an excellent way to familiarize yourself with the theorem while simultaneously learning about the relationship between carbon emissions and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.

bathtub

 
Stock and Flow Diagramming

These diagrams are an important way to visualize and understand how a system of different elements is working together. As Donella Meadows wrote in Thinking in Systems,”If you understand the dynamics (behavior over time) of stocks and flows, you understand a good deal about the behavior of complex systems.” In describing stocks and flows, Donella Meadows stated, “A system stock is just what it sounds like: a store, a quantity of material or information that has built up over time.  It may be a population, an inventory, the wood in a tree, the water in a well, the money in a bank…Stocks change over time through the actions of flows, usually actual physical flows into or out of a stock–filling, draining, births, deaths, production, consumption, growth, decay, spending, saving.  Stocks, then, are accumulations, or integrals, of flows.”

Below is a more complex example of a stock and flow diagram that illustrates the volume of living wood in a forest. For more information on stocks and flows and this diagram, read this excerpt from Thinking in Systems.

stock and flow diagram of a forest

 

 
Dana Meadows’ Visioning Prompts from Envisioning a Sustainable World

This exercise was inspired by “Envisioning a Sustainable World,” a speech delivered by Donella Meadows at a 1994 Sustainability Conference in Costa Rica.  Download this PDF tool to use as a guide for envisioning: a vital first step toward any goal.

Guided Envisioning of a Sustainable World

 
Print Friendly, PDF & Email
Recent Posts

    Dancing with Systems: A learning Journey into Donella Meadows’ Living Legacy
    Dennis Meadows on the 50th anniversary of the publication of The Limits to Growth
    Learning from Dana, a Mentor and Friend
    1993 Nobel Conference: Gustavus Adolphus College
    Video: Sustainable Systems Lecture

Donella Meadows Legacy

    Publications
        Global Citizen Columns
        Dear Folks Letters
        Books
        Articles
    Systems Thinking Resources
        Thinking in Systems
        Leverage Points
        Dancing With Systems
        Systems Thinking Resource List

    multimedia
        Video Resources
        Videos
        Photos of Dana
    Quotations
        Tributes to Dana
        Favorite Dana Quotes
        Send Us Your Favorite Quote

About The Donella Meadows Project

The mission of the Donella Meadows Project is to preserve Donella (Dana) H. Meadows’s legacy as an inspiring leader, scholar, writer, and teacher; to manage the intellectual property rights related to Dana’s published work; to provide and maintain a comprehensive and easily accessible archive of her work online, including articles, columns, and letters; to develop new resources and programs that apply her ideas to current issues and make them available to an ever-larger network of students, practitioners, and leaders in social change.  Read More
Newsletter Sign Up

The Academy occasionally sends E-newsletters with updates on the work of our fellows, the Donella Meadows Project and more. Sign up here if you'd like to stay connected.
Subscribe to our mailing list
Email Address *
First Name
Last Name
Select your interests below:

    Workshops & Learning Hives
    Academy Fellows Program
    Multimedia Systems Change Fieldbook
    Donella Meadows Project
    Systems Change Stories

Contact Form

Your Name

Your E-mail Address

Your Message

captcha
    

→
    

About The Donella Meadows Project

    The Donella Meadows Project
    Academy for Systems Change, formerly Donella Meadows Institute
    Fellow Travelers
    Contact Us

Archives

    Tributes to Dana
    Bibliography
    Articles
    Global Citizen Columns
    Dear Folks Letters
    Books
    Media
    Articles & Essays by Colleagues

Resources

    Systems Thinking Resources
    Global Citizens Blog
    Climate Change Mitigation Tool
    Donella Meadows Leadership Fellows Program

The Donella Meadows Project, a project of the Academy for Systems Change   |   Contact Us

© 1996-2025 The Academy for Systems Change. All Rights Reserved.


